[Music]
do
once native to the british isles the
beaver has been absent from the uk
countryside for over
400 years but now thanks to a few
dedicated groups and
individuals the beaver is making a
comeback
and could be in the uk to stay
up until relatively recently beavers
would have been found in every fresh
water system
across the uk that was until we hunted
them to extinction mainly for their fur
and their saint glands
however a few reintroduction projects
are aiming to make the beaver
a familiar face of the british
countryside once more
[Music]
we've traveled to wood valley farm in
the heart of cornwall to meet chris
jones
who runs the cornwall beaver project who
have reintroduced beavers into a special
five-acre enclosure we wanted to find
out more about these remarkable mammals
and how the beavers themselves are
rescuing the landscape
as well as other species
from helping to reduce flooding to
improving habitats for wildlife
beavers are a species that could
potentially benefit not only cornwall
but the entire of the uk they
are known to be a keystone species which
means they benefit a wide range of other
wildlife
from insects and amphibians to mammals
and birds
beavers create networks of water
channels and dams which they dig
and build themselves and it's these that
potentially hold the key to reduce
flooding
as these vast wetland habitats not only
hold water
but also slow it down
this simply means that during heavy
rainfall water doesn't flow
as quickly into rivers which helps
prevent them
from overflowing and bursting their
banks
not only that but beavers can help make
river
water cleaner by decreasing the water's
flow
almost acts as a filter which causes
soil sediment and pollutants
to settle at the bottom of beaver ponds
which again
is good news for the environment
so chris when did the beavers first
arrive here
they came to us in june 2017
uh after about three and a half years of
feasibility
um doing baseline research and raising
some money to build a fence
so it was a bit of a journey to get
there but june 2017 is when the beavers
hit the water here
how have the beavers changed the
landscape and what are the
biggest changes you've seen here the
fundamental change
to start with was they raised the water
levels in this pond there was a pond
here
it's now four times deeper and twice as
big an area
than it was before but also they've
created another four big ponds heading
downstream and they've started to branch
out and there's
a series of ponds being created on a
parallel line to the original stream as
well so then
obviously you can see here there's tree
stumps and so on around us and
they do fell a certain number of trees
which is
allows a lot of light to get into you
get more undergrowth and more
interesting opportunities for other
animals so it's kind of creating not
just biodiversity it's creating
structural diversity
which is so important in ecology they
are
superb with water i don't know how
they do what they do you know the
thought processes or if it is just going
on blind instinct but they really do not
know how to engineer a landscape
the whole reason they build the dams
is to create a certain depth of water if
this is a deep river behind us
say a meter plus deep they wouldn't
bother to do any damning
they'll just have a burrow that goes in
underwater and then up into
uh clear air within the bank still and
that's where they'd have their young
and that would be their safety and their
refuge
because the water wasn't deep enough
here they then
made it deep enough in other words they
come to an environment which they kind
of can't
quite like but it's not right on the
water and they
create the water they need to live
the landscape in the uk has changed
dramatically over the last 400 years do
you think that we will be able to
co-exist with beavers once again
well i think a really good illustration
is what's happening bavaria which has an
incredibly intensively farmed landscape
they're just everywhere and they can
make that
work with competing land uses and so on
by having a really good management
structure so that if there are any
problems with the beaver
they can be sorted out quickly and
efficiently and quietly
and everyone's able to carry on as
before
so in a way the beavers are rescuing the
ecosystem which is pretty important
isn't it it is totally rescuing the
landscape
you know in victorian times pretty much
across the country
headwaters like this were straightened
up put into
into deep ditches drainage networks were
set up
so that any rain which got away from
here as fast as possible
and of course that means downstream of
here if you live in a village or
something
then you get that rain really really
fast and
our local village floods and it floods
because we've affected the drainage up
here so much
and now what we're trying to do is to
undo the hydrological damage that was
done
in victorian times but beavers aren't
only restoring the ecology of the area
they are also
creating new habitats for other species
to thrive
[Music]
so chris what's the rarest species
you've seen here since the beavers
returned
we've seen water rails
we've seen pole cats neither which are
particularly rare i think of the whole
country but they're fairly
unusual here still but we've had seven
new bird records
and four new mammal records here and
we're
seeing things all the time really
new things you know any time you come
down there could be some new
thing which you haven't noticed before
which is just delightful
[Music]
since the beavers first arrived in
cornwall they have done
extremely well and in 2018 had their
first
kits the first beaver kits in cornwall
in over 400 years and this year
chris told us they've had kits again so
we stuck around to investigate
and it wasn't long as right before our
very eyes the entire family came
out onto the bank to feed and groom one
another
adult beaver pairs are monogamous
meaning they make for life
and most years they will have between
two to four kits
the kits will emerge from the lodge at
around three weeks old and will begin to
explore their surroundings
learning everything from their parents
about becoming
little ecosystem engineers themselves
[Music]
it's incredible to think just how one
mammal
is benefiting so many other species just
by being here
i mean beavers really are the unsung
ecological heroes and when we think of
wild rescue we often think
of ourselves rescuing other species but
here
it is the beaver that is saving wildlife
it just needed a little helping hand
[Music]
you